---
title: "Constraint Programming Optimization"
author: "PATYK Jonathan / ROUABAH Walid"
date: "10 April 2026"
geometry: margin=2.5cm
toc: false
numbersections: false
colorlinks: true
linkcolor: blue
urlcolor: blue
header-includes:
  - \usepackage{setspace}
  - \onehalfspacing
---


## 1st Problem : Frequency Allocation

The provided instance data has been directly converted into a JSON file (data.json) and used as input for the PyCSP3 model . The original OPL model has been translated into Python using PyCSP3 while preserving its structure, including intra-cell and inter-cell distance constraints.

An objective has been added to comply with the project requirements: minimizing the number of distinct frequencies used.

Additionally, a symmetry breaking strategy has been introduced to improve performance by reducing equivalent solutions. This helps the solver explore the search space more efficiently.

The model can be executed with the following command:

``` python.exe .\frequency_allocation.py --time-limit 10 ```

or just

``` python.exe .\frequency_allocation.py ```
(default time limit is 15 seconds)

A time limit of 10 seconds is generally sufficient to obtain a solution on a standard machine. However, execution time may vary depending on hardware performance. Please check if you have 95 distinct frequencies, otherwise do not hesite to add seconds.

Finally, a log file generated by the ACE solver is produced in the project directory, providing additional details about the solving process.

## 2nd Problem : Integrated Healthcare Timetabling Competition (IHTC 2024)

### 1. Description 

This project focuses on modeling and solving a simplified version of the scheduling problem introduced in the IHTC 2024, using Constraint Programming. The objective is to schedule the admission of patients into a hospital over a given planning horizon.

For each admitted patient, the model must determine:

  - The admission day.

  - The assigned room.

  - The assigned operating theater.

By respecting some hard constraints given in the competition.


### 2. Model 

Decision Variables :

```python
x_admitted[i]: 1 if patient $i$ is admitted, 0 otherwise.

x_day[i][d]: 1 if patient $i$ is admitted on day $d$.

x_room[i][r]: 1 if patient $i$ is assigned to room $r$.

x_ot[i][o]: 1 if patient $i$ is assigned to operating theater $o$.

```

Sum constraints iterate over the planning to ensure that daily room capacities, OT availabilities and surgeon schedules are not exceeded. \newline
Gender mixing is prevented by enforcing that the sum of males or the sum of females in a room on any given day is strictly zero. \newline

Objective function :
```python
unplanned_optionals = [
    (1 - x_admitted[i]) for i, p in enumerate(patients_data) if not p.get("mandatory", False)
]
minimize(Sum(unplanned_optionals))
```
This corresponds to the S8 objective, which aims to minimize the number of unscheduled non-mandatory patients

### 3. Problems Encountered

**Handling JSON Parsing Errors:** We couldn't use PyCSP3's standard -data= because it crashes on the asymmetric IHTC 
JSON files (e.g. missing keys like incompatible_room_ids cause a NamedTuple TypeError). To get around this 
limitation, we handled the JSON parsing manually and passed the file path through our own -mydata= argument instead

### 4. Optimization 

**Pre-filtering**
To handle massive instances we introduced a pre-filtering step. Before generating constraints, we analyze the input data to identify days where a patient's surgeon is unavailable, when all operating theaters lack capacity for the surgery. For these impossible days, $x_day[i][d]$ is set to 0.

### Results

| Instance | Resolution Time (s) | First Sol. Time (Bound) | No. of Solutions | Best Objective (S8) |
| :--- | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| **i29** | 194  | 119 (208) | 6 | 203 |
| **i28** | 407  | 301 (191) | 2 |190  |
| **i25** | 406  | 29 (211)  | 41 | 101 |
| **i20** | 506 | no solution found
| **i15** | 207  | 14 (102)  | 36 | 67 |
| **i10** | 207  | 21 (107)  | 44 | 64 |
| **test01** | 26 | 1.47 (31)  | 18 | 8 |
| **test09** | 60 | 17.2 (58)  | 7 | 52 |

Result Analysis

Overall, the solver does a pretty good job on most instances, even though it clearly hits its limits on the hardest problems.

### Usage example
```python -X utf8 .\projet.py -mydata=\test\test09.json -solve -s=all```
